---
layout: post
title: In search of tone
---

A few weeks ago at the [LBPS Collogue] I was downstairs from the main
event in where [Finn Moore] was tuning up and getting ready for his
performance. I commented on the **big**, resonant sound he was getting
out of his border pipes. "Cane," he said. Later on, Finn was busy and
I was speaking with Hamish. I wondered if he thought it might be
possible to make up a set of cane reeds to suit the [Nigel Richard]
drones which I play.  There was a long pause. No, he said, he wasn't
familiar enough with Nigel's drones to be confident about getting it
right.

The recommended drone reeds for Nigel Richard's pipes are [Ezeedrone]
synthetic reeds. These are the ones that will come with a new
set. They sound good and are very stable. But they could sound
better. I had discussed with Nigel the possibility of a cane bass
drone reed when he was making up the pipes, and he was quite receptive
to the idea, but in the end it didn't happen.

There aren't many makers of cane reeds for border pipes. The only one
that was possible to easily find was [Iain Allen] down in Essex. I
ordered a set for &pound;20 and made a note that my pipes have a baritone
drone which isn't an option when ordering on his web site. The reeds
arrived a few days later, very quick turnaround, and then spent the
next week or so chasing me from office to office around the
university, *sigh*.

The first thing that struck me about the reeds from Iain is how small
and fragile looking they were. I had only ever seen cane reeds for the
highland pipes, and obviously they would be smaller for the border
pipes but quite how much smaller was a bit surprising.

Unlike the Ezeedrones, the cane reeds need to be played in and settle
a bit. It is easiest to add them into the mix one by one. I recommend
starting with the bass drone because it has the biggest effect on the
overall sound. The reed had closed a bit in transit and required some
TLC to get it going -- a fair amount, actually, involving putting a
hair under the tongue and quite a bit of gentle snapping of the
tongue. But it fell into line fairly quickly. And the rich harmonics
and resonant low frequency sound is definitely worth it!

Unfortunately the tenor reed that arrived was no good -- it had a
crooked tongue and seemed in any case too small. It wanted to tune 
with the drone top way too high, almost falling off. Also the reed
itself was too thin. It  was difficult to get it to sit properly in
the reed seat without what seemed like an unreasonably large amount of
extra waxed hemp on the bottom. The baritone reed, only slightly
larger than the tenor, actually suited the tenor drone much
better. This isn't a very big deal because I most often play without
the baritone drone anyways.

Once they've begun to settle in and stabilise, the sound is so much
richer and more vibrant than the Ezeedrone reeds. The drones also
seem louder and when they're in tune (at the time of writing they
still drift fairly quickly but hopefully this will improve) they
blend beautifully with the chanter.

[LBPS Collogue]: http://lbps.net/lbps/general/254-annual-collogue-report.html
[Finn Moore]: http://www.hamishmoore.com/
[Nigel Richard]: http://www.garviebagpipes.co.uk/
[Ezeedrone]: http://www.pipedreamsreeds.com/reeds_drone.php
[Iain Allen]: http://bagpipereeds.co.uk/
